---
sidebar_label: 'Dynamic Variables'
---
# Dynamic Variables
## Introduction to Dynamic Variables

The LSAM database includes a variable field definition table file with two variable types that can be used for many purposes. Dynamic variables of type L are used to update the stored LDA content for tracked, queued or captured jobs. Dynamic variables of type V are used to update the job parameters of any job submitted to the LSAM by OpCon. The type V variables are also supported by various fields of Spool File Scan Rules and of Captured Data Response Rules, as well as by other LSAM functions (documented within other topics of this documentation). Each of these variable field definitions has a token name to identify them, but the token name of type L variables must match either the job name of tracked and queued jobs or the captured job ID of captured jobs.

Dynamic variable values are always applied to a job at the last moment before the LSAM submits the job for execution. When the LSAM debug logging function is turned on, the submitted job log file (option 4 in the LSAM's log file viewer menu) will report on actions performed by dynamic variables. It is possible to see in that log file the updated LDA content and also the before- and after-versions of the SBMJOB command string.

Similarly, dynamic variables used with Captured Data Response Rules are interpreted at the time when data is captured, for example, as the SCANSPLF command is executing or as Operator Replay screen data or Message Management data is being captured. As each data element is being stored to the Captured Data log file, the system checks for Captured Data Response Rules to process. Dynamic variables may be part of the comparison rule that allows a Captured Data Response to be executed, and they can also comprise all or part of the command that is executed.

Regardless of the purpose of the dynamic variable, the value inserted to replace the LSAM's dynamic variable can be either a fixed value that is stored in the dynamic variables master file record or it can be a value produced by a user-defined program that has been registered in the dynamic variable's master record. When the fixed value approach is used, that fixed value may actually be updated at any time by the LSAM's SETDYNVAR or SETCAPVAR commands. These commands present some interesting possibilities.

It is possible, for example, to use a separately scheduled OpCon job or the pre-run command line of an OpCon job for IBM i to execute the SETDYNVAR command just before another job is executed that will depend on that dynamic variable. It is also possible to include OpCon property tokens in the VALUE parameter of the SETDYNVAR command so that a value calculated by OpCon can be passed along to the LSAM, and the final result is that a job executing under IBM i can have its behavior controlled by virtually any OpCon property.

Separate from the value controls that apply to all dynamic variables,the dynamic variable type field determines how the value is applied to attributes of a job.

Dynamic variables of type L are used specifically for updating the stored LDA contents associated with a tracked, queued or captured job. This type of variable must use the Tracked (or Queued) Job Name or the Captured Job ID as the Variable Name in the dynamic variable master file. There are dynamic variable parameters used only for this type of variable that specify the location and length of the LDA content that should be updated. The other dynamic variable type V cannot be used to update LDA contents, and the start position and length fields cannot be used with type V variables.

Dynamic variables of type V can be used, among other purposes, to update any part of the total command string that the LSAM uses to submit jobs. This means that, depending on how and where a job is being defined (that is, by using OpCon job master records or by using the Capture Job function and maintenance), it is possible all command parameters may be optionally included, or just the values of single command parameter may be updated. It is also possible to modify the content of the submitted job's command line using type V dynamic variables.

To use type V dynamic variables, the Variable Name value is enclosed within a pair of designated control characters to form a token. This token is inserted anywhere in the submitted job's command line. At the point where the LSAM has assembled the total SBMJOB command, it performs a scan for any dynamic variable tokens and then replaces those tokens with the value produced by the dynamic variable. (The processing of dynamic variables used with Capture Data Response Rules is described in [Operator Replay Scripts](../operator-replay/overview.md), in [Message Management](../message-management/overview.md) , and elsewhere in this Events and Utilities menu in relation to the SCANSPLF command.)

The special characters used to make tokens out of type V dynamic variables are specified in the LSAM's Job Tracking configuration function, from the LSAM menu system. In most cases, it should not be necessary to modify these characters. A single pair of curly brackets {} have been chosen as the default control characters for dynamic variable tokens because this convention permits the dynamic variable token to pass transparently through the different property (variable, token) replacement logic used by OpCon. The LSAM Events and Utilities menu option 7: LSAM Utility configuration provides a means to change these characters in order to accommodate translation table conflicts that might arise in some countries where rules that work well for English or other Western language translation tables may not apply.
